# GetAndCleanDataProject
The files for the GettingAndCleaningData class project
This file (README.md), the run_analysis.R file and a CodeBook.txt file.
===================
run_analysis.R
===================
Kent Boyer
<url> to run_analysis.R

1) Select a working directory and copy run_analysis.R and the files activity_lables.text and features.txt into it

2) Create a test sub-directory in the working directory and copy the files subject_test.txt, y_test.txt 
and x_test.txt into it.

3) Create a train sub-directory in the working directory and copy the files subject_train.txt, y_train.txt 
and x_train.txt into it.

4) Start R, set the working directory to where you put run_analysis.R and execute the command source("run_analysis.R")

5) The file tidy_data.txt will be written to the working directory when the script completes

What run_analsysis.R Does:
===================
The file tidy_data.txt was produced by running the script run_analysis.R to combine eight data files found in:
https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

In summary, the script reads the eight files* needed to produce a single tidy** data set and then assembles them
as described below.
The script performs the following actions to produce the file tidy_data.txt:

1 Loads the plyr library so the ddply() function is available

2 Reads each of eight files into data frames

3 Appends the train data frames to the corresponding test data frames to produce
  three data frames (subjects, x_data, y_data) containing all of the data

4 In order to have activity labels instead of just a number in the tidy data, the activity_labels data frame 
  and the y_data data frame are merged to create a new Activities data frame.
  The R merge() function changes the order of the data, so before the merge, a row number column is 
  added to the y_data so the new Activity data frame can be restored to the same order as y_data.
  If this step is omitted, when the activity labels are added as a column to x_data, the activities
  and the measurement data will be scrambled.

    4a	Add a row sequence number to y_data   

    4b	Merge y_data and activity_labels by the column V1 to create the activity data frame

    4c	Sort activity by the row sequence number from 4a using the order() function.  

5 Replace the column names in x_data that were automatically generated by the read.table function
  (V1,V2,V3...V561) with the descriptive names from the features file.

6 Add the Subject and the activity labels in Activity as new columns to x_data.

7 Create a vector with all of the feature names with "mean" in them. 

8 Create a vector with all of the feature names with "std" in them.

9 Create a new data frame by subsetting the data frame to include only Activity, Subject and the mean and std columns.

10 Create the tidy_data data frame by using the ddply() function from the plyr package to compute the 
   mean of each of the measurement columns by Activity, by Subject.  
   The resulting data set has one row for each combination of Activity (6) and Subject (30), resulting in 180 rows.

11) Write the tidy_data data frame out to a text file

12) Clean up the environment in R

* The eight original data files are divided up amoung three directories: working directory, test directory 
and train directory.  The authors of the original data set used the contents of the train directory to 
build a mathematical model to predict the activity from the measurements. The contents of the test directory 
were used to test the accuracy of the model. 
The files are:
1) activity_labels.txt -  Labels for each of the 6 activities
2) features.txt - Names for each of the 561 measurements in x_test and x_train
3) subject_test - The 9 subjects in the test data set
4) y_test - Holds the subject that goes with each row in x_test
5) x_test - 561 data points derived from the smart phone's accelerometer and gyroscope data generated 
	during the period of time that a test subject (from the test group) was engaged in an activity
6) subject_train - The 21 subjects in the train data set
7) y_train - Holds the subject that goes with each row in x_train
8) x_train - Same as x_test for the train subjects

**For an explanation of what constitutes tidy data and why that is desireable, see the paper by Hadley Wickham
at http://www.jstatsoft.org/v59/i10/paper


======= Due to formatting issues, the Code Book of Variables is in the CodeBook.txt file======


